Update 02.introduction.md (#187)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/02.introduction.md

One week later, 4593 confirmed cases had been identified, spanning not only Asia, but also Australia, North America, and Europe [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200128-sitrep-8-ncov-cleared.pdf].
On March 11, 2020, WHO formally classified the situation as a pandemic [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200311-sitrep-51-covid-19.pdf].

> By WHO Situation Report 61, released on March 20, 2020, 266,073 confirmed cases had been reported worldwide, with cases on every continent except Antarctica [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200321-sitrep-61-covid-19.pdf].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
If you didn't guess, I wrote this during the initial configuring on March 20th -- that's the only reason March 20th was significant :) Thanks for updating it!

> On April 4, 2020, the WHO reported that the global number of confirmed cases had surpassed one million [@https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200404-sitrep-75-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=99251b2b_4].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On April 4, 2020, the WHO reported that the global number of confirmed cases had surpassed one million [@url:https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200404-sitrep-75-covid-19.pdf?sfvrsn=99251b2b_4].
```

Reviewer 2: we probably need to update this sentence more often once new statements get released

> At this time, WHO Situation Report 81 demonstrates that over 92,000 deaths have been reported due to COVID-19 worldwide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this time, over 92,000 deaths had been reported due to COVID-19 worldwide.
```

#### Classification:
Coronaviridae, commonly called Coronavirus, is a family of positive-sense RNA viruses [@isbn:0781760607]. 
Members of this family include the Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), which are two species, as well as SARS-CoV-2 [@url:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coronaviridae#Taxonomy].
Coronaviridae are classified into four main groups called alphacoronaviruses, betacoronaviruses, gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses. 

> Alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses are mainly found in mammals such as bats, rodents, civets, and humans, whereas gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses have their gene source from birds and are mainly found in birds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses are mainly found in mammals such as bats, rodents, civets, and humans, whereas gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses are mainly found in birds.
```

Reviewer 2: I don't really know what "their gene source from birds" is supposed to mean but I would leave it out.

Author: Genetic source, like gene pool. I'm good to leave it out

> Phylogenetic analysis of a PCR amplicon fragment from five patients in a family cluster who visited Wuhan, China along with the total virus genome of 29.8 kilobases indicates that the virus is a novel betacoronavirus belonging to the B lineage, also known as sarbecovirus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Phylogenetic analysis of a PCR amplicon fragment from five patients along with the total virus genome of 29.8 kilobases indicates that the virus is a novel betacoronavirus belonging to the B lineage, also known as sarbecovirus.
```

> The sarbecovirus lineage also includes the human SARS coronavirus (@doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30154-9). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sarbecovirus lineage also includes the human SARS coronavirus [@doi:10/ggjs7j]. 
```
Manubot doesn't like DOIs that have parentheses, so I converted this using shortdoi.org (in case you're wondering!)

*Presentation of COVID-19:* 
Information is rapidly becoming available about the wide range of symptoms that can be associated with COVID-19 as well as the range of symptom severity, onset from exposure, and possible risk or protective factors...

> In a retrospective sample of COVID-19 patients in Wuhan observed during December 2019 and January 2020, [@doi:10/ggnxb3] described the clinical features of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 including lower respiratory tract infection with fever, dry cough, and dyspnea. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Retrospective samples of COVID-19 patients described the clinical presentations of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 which included lower respiratory tract infection with fever, dry cough, and dyspnea [@doi:10/ggnxb3]. 
```

> [@doi:10/ggnxb3] noted that upper respiratory tract symptoms were less common which suggests that the virus targets cells located in the lower respiratory tract. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[@doi:10/ggnxb3] noted that upper respiratory tract symptoms were less common, which suggests that the virus targets cells located in the lower respiratory tract. 
```

> Recent reports suggest that symptoms of infection by SARS-CoV-2 can vary greatly, making it difficult for public health agencies to provide clear recommendations for citizens regarding what symptoms indicate infection and should prompt isolation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The symptoms of infection by SARS-CoV-2 can vary greatly, making it difficult for public health agencies to provide clear recommendations for citizens regarding what symptoms indicate infection and should prompt isolation. 
```

> [@doi:10/ggnxb3] also found that a higher probability of mortality was associated with older age and higher Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score, as well as high levels of d-dimer. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[@doi:10/ggnxb3] found that a higher probability of mortality was associated with older age and higher Sequential Organ Failure Assessment scores, as well as high levels of d-dimer. 
```

> Mortality also appeared to be associated with other biomarkers measured in blood samples including lactate dehydrogenase and cardiac troponin I, although these analyses may not have been appropriately corrected for multiple testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mortality might be associated with other biomarkers measured in blood samples including lactate dehydrogenase and cardiac troponin I, although these analyses may not have been appropriately corrected for multiple testing.
```

> They also found that survivors continued to shed the virus for a median of 20 days and a maximum of at least 37 days.

Reviewer 2: Replace "They" with whoever "They" is here. I assume you mean the group who published the study but the reference is three sentences away at this point so it is not easy to understand who "they" is referring to.

Reviewer 2: What is the significance of this finding? Needs to be put into context.

Author: These sentences were already there when I added to the review (I didn't write it), but I think this last sentence was meant to imply that patients might be contagious for up to 37 days. I agree, it doesn't have much context. I'm new to GitHub - is there some way to tell who initially wrote it?

Reviewer 3: Yes, we can see who wrote it by browsing to the introduction file at https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review/blob/master/content/02.introduction.md and then clicking the "Blame" button at the top.  Despite the negative sounding connotation, it is a helpful way to see who originally wrote or edited something to get clarification from them.  In this case the text is from #164 so @dziakj1 could help clarify the phrasing here.

#### Vaccines for Viruses: Strategies for and challenges to development

Generally, the first step in producing a vaccine is characterizing the target.

> The genetic sequence of SARS-CoV-2 was released to the world on January 11, 2020, which launched an intense global effort to develop a vaccine to prevent COVID-19.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The genetic sequence of SARS-CoV-2 was published on January 11, 2020, which aided the global effort to develop a vaccine to prevent COVID-19.
```

Reviewer 2: The genetic sequence is not the reason why we try to develop a vaccine...but it helped!

> The Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) is coordinating global health agencies and vaccine developers to develop vaccines against SARS-CoV-2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) is coordinating global health agencies and pharmaceutical companies to develop vaccines against SARS-CoV-2.
```

> As of April 8, 2020, there are 115 vaccine candidates to prevent COVID-19, of which 78 were active. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of April 8, 2020, there were 115 vaccine candidates to prevent COVID-19, of which 78 were active. 
```

> Of the 78 active vaccine programs, 73 were categorized as in the preclinical or exploratory stage (@doi:10.1038/d41573-020-00073-5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of the 78 active vaccine programs, 73 were categorized as in the preclinical or exploratory stage [@doi:10.1038/d41573-020-00073-5].
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of the 78 active vaccine programs, 73 were in the preclinical or exploratory stage [@doi:10.1038/d41573-020-00073-5].
```

Historically, an H1N1 influenza vaccine was developed relatively efficiently, mainly because influenza-vaccine technology had already been developed and regulatory agencies had already decided that vaccines produced using egg- and cell-based platforms could be licensed under the regulations used for a strain change.

> Critiques of the experience producing and distributing the H1N1 vaccine have stressed the need for alternative development-and-manufacturing platforms that can be readily adapted to new pathogens.

Reviewer 4: Here it's `development-and-manufacturing platforms` while further down it's `developing and manufacturing platforms`. Perhaps `development and manufacturing platforms` in both cases?

Author: I think development and manufacturing platforms in both cases sounds better for the consistency!

> Although a monovalent H1N1 vaccine was not available before the pandemic peaked in the United States and Europe, it was available soon afterward as a stand-alone vaccine that was eventually incorporated into the commercially available seasonal influenza vaccines (@doi:10.1056/NEJMp2005630).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although a monovalent H1N1 vaccine was not available before the pandemic peaked in the United States and Europe, it was available soon afterward as a stand-alone vaccine that was eventually incorporated into the commercially available seasonal influenza vaccines [@doi:10.1056/NEJMp2005630].
```

> Although a monovalent H1N1 vaccine was not available before the pandemic peaked in the United States and Europe, it was available soon afterward as a stand-alone vaccine that was eventually incorporated into the commercially available seasonal influenza vaccines (@doi:10.1056/NEJMp2005630).

Reviewer 2: I think this part needs to be more condensed, especially since it is the intro for vaccines for COVID-19 and this feels a little bit off topic for the intro

Author: There note in this section said, "What information is needed to develop a vaccine? How have vaccines for other viruses such as H1N1 been developed?" I wouldn't have thought to necessarily talk about H1N1 otherwise.

> If H1N1 vaccine development provides any indication, considering developing and manufacturing platforms for promising COVID-19 vaccine trials early could hasten the emergence of an effective prophylactic vaccines against SARS-CoV-2. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If H1N1 vaccine development provides any indication, considering developing and manufacturing platforms for promising COVID-19 vaccine trials early could hasten the emergence of an effective prophylactic vaccine against SARS-CoV-2. 
```

Unlike many global vaccine development programs previously, such as with H1N1, the vaccine development landscape for COVID-19 includes vaccines produced by a wide array of technologies. 

> Experience in the field of oncology is encouraging COVID-19 vaccine developers to use next-generation approaches in vaccine development, which has led to the great diversity of vaccine development programs (@https://www.the-scientist.com/news-opinion/newer-vaccine-technologies-deployed-to-develop-covid-19-shot-67152). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Experience in the field of oncology is encouraging COVID-19 vaccine developers to use next-generation approaches to vaccine development, which have led to the great diversity of vaccine development programs [@url:https://www.the-scientist.com/news-opinion/newer-vaccine-technologies-deployed-to-develop-covid-19-shot-67152]. 
```

> Diverse technology platforms include DNA, RNA, virus-like particle, recombinant protein, both replicating and non-replicating viral vectors, live attenuated virus as well as inactivated virus approaches. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diverse technology platforms include DNA, RNA, virus-like particle, recombinant protein, both replicating and non-replicating viral vectors, live attenuated virus, and inactivated virus approaches. 
```
I don't know much about vaccines, but I'm guessing these fall into different categories? e.g., could you have an RNA vaccine that was also an inactivated virus approach? If so, would it be possible to sign post a little more to say what each grouping refers to?

Author: That's a good point! I was listing as many subtypes of vaccine development as I could think of since these would be described in more detail in the Vaccines section of the paper. Perhaps:

"Diverse technology platforms include a wide variety of DNA, RNA, viral particle and recombinant protein approaches."

Maybe we can wait to provide details about replicating/non-replicating and live/inactivated later under each subsection (DNA, RNA, etc) in the Vaccines section later in the paper to avoid confusion?

Reviewer 2: I would change the order and live-attenuated and inactivated in the beginning since these are the oldest types and then follow up with more modern approaches

> Given these vast differences, it is possible that some vaccine products may eventually be shown to be more effective in certain subpopulations (such as children, pregnant women, immunocompromised patients, the elderly etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the wide range of vaccines under development, it is possible that some vaccine products may eventually be shown to be more effective in certain subpopulations, such as children, pregnant women, immunocompromised patients, the elderly, etc.
```
